---
title: "Who’s the most electable Democrat? It might be Warren or Buttigieg, not Biden."
date: 2019-12-24
description: A study examines who might do best in the electoral college. 
---

The biggest issue in the Democratic presidential primary isn’t health care or
immigration or gun control. It’s electability. A strong majority of Democratic
voters report that it’s more important that the party nominate a candidate who
can beat President Trump than someone they agree with on the issues.

But electability is hard to measure. Some polls ask voters who they would pick
in a hypothetical matchup between each Democratic candidate and Trump.
Unfortunately, these polls have only been as accurate as random chance at
picking winners in the past, given how much can change over the course of an
election.

The electoral college adds another complication. In 2016, Hillary Clinton won
nearly 2.9 million more votes than Trump — reminding us that winning a majority
of voters doesn’t mean winning the presidency.

But early head-to-head polls aren’t useless. They reveal important demographic
patterns that help us understand how candidates would perform in the electoral
college. A candidate who can’t appeal to key demographic groups in swing states
will have a much harder time winning the presidency.

So which of the leading Democratic candidates has demographic strengths that
would be an advantage in the electoral college?

# Here’s how I did my research

To answer this question, I used data from two recent Quinnipiac national polls
that reported how different demographic groups said they would vote in
hypothetical matchups between Trump and each of the five major Democratic
candidates. With this, we can measure the difference between candidates’
support in each demographic group and their overall level of support.

Next, we compare these differences to the results of the 2016 election, asking
whether a candidate is doing better or worse than Clinton did, and with which
groups. Using these comparisons, and a statistical model built from state
election returns, exit polls and census data, we can adjust the 2016 results to
create a hypothetical 2020 election. This lets us predict which states each
candidate would win, if they won the same fraction of the national popular vote
as Clinton.

Last, we can turn a knob on the model, so to speak, to ask what would happen if
a candidate won more or less of the popular vote than Clinton did. There’s
uncertainty in the underlying polls, which carries over into the predictions;
we don’t know exactly what would happen if Joe Biden won 48.5 percent of the
national popular vote, for example. So the model gives probabilities,
predicting that he would win Virginia 98 percent of the time and lose Minnesota
75 percent of the time, based on how he is polling among that state’s major
demographic groups and how much of the state’s electorate each group
represents.

To check this approach, I performed the same analysis on four early polls from
2015. The model indicated that Clinton would have a hard time winning the Rust
Belt states, because she was performing poorly with white men and voters
without a college degree. It estimated that to win Pennsylvania, Michigan,
Wisconsin and Ohio, she would need an additional 0.6 percent in the popular
vote — over three-quarters of a million votes — than Barack Obama won in 2012.
These predictions come from national polling matchups in which Clinton was
leading Trump by more than double her eventual margin.

# Overall, Democrats are at a disadvantage in the electoral college — but Elizabeth Warren and Pete Buttigieg might do best

In the figure below, you can see how each candidate’s popular vote would
translate into electoral votes, according to the model. Candidates with an
electoral college advantage win more electoral votes for the same national
popular vote totals, because the demographic groups that dominate key swing
states prefer that candidate. You can see which candidate gets more electoral
college bang for each vote by whose lines are highest for each popular vote
percentage.

Every Democratic candidate would need to win more than 50 percent of the
popular vote to win the electoral college. But exactly how much varies by
candidate: Warren makes it to 270 electoral votes first, with about 50.7
percent of the popular vote, followed by Buttigieg, then Kamala D. Harris, and
finally Joe Biden and Bernie Sanders. These estimates are not perfect; though
Warren wins first most of the time, she isn’t guaranteed to do so.

To understand these patterns, let’s look at two key sets of swing states: the
Rust Belt states of Michigan, Pennsylvania and Wisconsin, which were key to
Trump’s victory in 2016; and the Southwestern states of Nevada and New Mexico.

The graph below shows how well a Democrat must do nationally to win back the
Rust Belt. On average, Democratic candidates poll 7.4 percent lower among
whites than among the general population. But Buttigieg polls only 6.4 percent
lower. As a result, he can usually win these states with 49 percent of the
national popular vote — and so would win more electoral votes, on average, than
his competitors.

But in Nevada and New Mexico, Warren wins first. While on average, the
Democratic candidates poll 8.9 percent higher among Hispanics than among the
general population, Warren polls 11 percent higher. As a result, she wins these
states with about 51.1 percent of the national popular vote, compared to
last-place Sanders with about 52.5 percent.

# Current projections suggest that Warren could win with the lowest national vote total

To capture the presidency, Democrats need to win both the Southwest and the
Rust Belt — and the Southwest will probably be more challenging than the Rust
Belt. While that may be surprising considering the 2016 election, in the 2012
election Obama’s margin in Nevada was narrower than in Wisconsin and Michigan.

Among the top Democratic candidates, Warren wins the Southwest — and the
presidency — with the lowest average share of the national popular vote.
Buttigieg’s Rust Belt strength isn’t matched in the Southwest. He usually needs
a slightly larger popular-vote margin to reach 270 electoral votes.

# But plenty can and will change between now and November 2020

Recessions, wars and scandals can — and often do — upend any presidential race.
These conclusions could change with new polling data. And candidates’
demographic strengths will probably shift as the campaign continues. All that
means is this analysis isn’t definitive.

But these patterns suggest Biden may be wrong in arguing that he is best
positioned to beat Trump. In swing states, he doesn’t perform exceptionally
well in any key demographic groups. In contrast, Warren’s support among
Hispanics and Buttigieg’s among whites set both up for an easier electoral
college victory.

Ultimately, it matters not just how many votes a candidate wins, but where they
win them.
